and here you are on earth
66 million years ago it's one of the
warmest periods in the planet's history
there are no ice caps yet everything is
lush and green
dinosaurs roam the earth
massive sauropods peacefully chew on
flowering plants and trees
their young ones following closely by
their side
ah you strain your neck to see their
heads five stories above you
but that's when you see something else a
bright spot in the sky
a shitty star ah make a wish wait a
minute
the star grows bigger brighter
little do the mass reptiles know today
marks the beginning of one of the
largest mass
extinction events in earth's history
three quarters of life on our planet
will be wiped out
hey we'll just hide over here and watch
five seconds before impact the meteorite
rips a hole through our atmosphere
like a needle in a balloon the resulting
supersonic
shock wave starts to ripple around the
globe you'd hear it on the opposite side
of the planet
the cosmic monster falling toward the
earth is the size
of mount everest at least six miles wide
and weighing
460 trillion tons the meteor is coming
in hot
and fast 12 miles per second heading
right for the yucatan peninsula in
present-day mexico
at that speed it could travel from la to
new york in under four minutes
impact the mountain size asteroid
smashes into the earth
if only it had been anywhere else life
on this planet might
look a lot different today the yucatan
peninsula
almost entirely underwater then was one
of just eight places on the entire globe
that would have let a giant space rock
wipe out nearly all life on the planet
meaning
the asteroid only had a 13 chance of
causing a mass extinction
and it happened to hit just the right
spot
well aren't we lucky at the point of
impact
there's an explosion a billion times
more powerful
than even the most massive volcanic
eruption
it looks like a new sun has appeared on
our planet's surface
the meteorite digs into the earth's
crust and explodes into a million pieces
you can still see the scar at left the
chicxulub crater is 93 miles wide
and 12 miles deep it could fit the
entire state of vermont
and 24 burj khalifa's stacked on top of
each other
something that leaves a scar like that
has global consequences
the earth ripples the shock wave spreads
for thousands of miles
the air blasts flatten force in a second
everything within striking radius is set
ablaze
nothing survives ground zero but that
was just the beginning
smaller fragments of the meteorite as
well as parts of the earth displaced by
the giant hole it dug
go ricocheting out reaching as far as
canada
the sky lights up with fireballs they
smash into the surface as well
dinosaurs that weren't in the blast
radius run in panic
but they have nowhere to hide it's only
about to get worse
the shock waves race across the sea the
tsunami is nearly a mile
high when it hits the coast the waves
keep traveling
reaching the furthest corners of the
planet even across the pacific
and up into the north atlantic they're
five stories high
they wash away everything in their path
besides the raging fires
and skyscraper size tsunamis the earth
is shaking from the worst earthquakes in
history
a planet lush and teeming with life only
a few minutes ago
has turned into a nightmarish place but
this was only
phase one five minutes after
impact small rocks dust and ash
rise high up into the atmosphere these
objects heat up
and melt they turn into hot lava that
begins to fall to the ground like
burning rain 10 hours after impact
fires continue to engulf everything in
their path
some surviving dinosaurs in north
america try to escape to unknown
territories
but now they're in dense swamps and
can't escape
one month after impact 15 trillion tons
two and a half million times the weight
of the great pyramid of giza
that much ash and soot are released into
the atmosphere
the cloud covers the entire planet and
blocks out the sun
the earth sinks into darkness surviving
plants can't photosynthesize
oxygen levels drop any animals left at
this point
are finally done in from lack of air
but the worst consequence was the
extinction of photoplankton
the entire oceanic food chain starts to
collapse like a house of cards
many marine animals have lost their main
source of food
surviving animals on land also can't
find anything to eat
there are no plants for the herbivores
and soon no herbivores left for the meat
eaters
and still there's the acid rain the
chixula meteorite hit a place
where there was a lot of sulfur the heat
of the impact vaporizes the toxic gas
instantly it mixes with the air in the
atmosphere
acid rains fall all over the planet the
oceans
become toxic and if all that doesn't get
them
the coal finally finishes off the job
with the sun blocked out
the burning fireball that is our planet
starts to cool down
what's left in the wake plants are a
little luckier than animals
seeds and pollen are able to survive
these harsh times
the first to slowly paint the charcoal
planet green
are ferns the wind carries their seeds
sprinkling them across the earth over 10
years
then come the palms the new planets
produce
oxygen and feed small mammals of the
reptiles
only turtles and ancient ancestors of
crocodiles can survive the temperature
and acidity of the planet's waters
unbelievably some bird-like dinosaurs
survive too
other species of birds evolve and
survive to this day
sadly though all terrestrial animals
over 50 pounds in weight went extinct
it took much longer for the animal
kingdom to recover
larger mammals such as rhinos began to
appear
only 15 million years after the
dinosaurs disappeared
blue whales the largest living creature
this planet has ever seen
bigger than any of the dinos only showed
up a little over four million years ago
did the dinos have a fighting chance
scientists say
that if the meteorite had hit in the
deeper ocean
the story would have gone a lot
differently yes the resulting tidal
waves would have been 10 times higher
than the already massive ones that
rippled across the planet
but even a giant mega tsunami wouldn't
be able to wipe out
75 percent of plant and animal life on
earth
what really did the dinosaurs in was the
global blackout
if the meteorite had hit in deeper water
not the shallow sea
of the gulf of mexico there wouldn't
have been so much dust and ash in the
atmosphere
that dropped the oxygen levels and cut
off the food chain from the very bottom
there's a theory that climate change and
other conditions on earth
66 million years ago would have still
wiped out the dinosaurs
no meteorite necessary it could be a
super volcano erupting
and spewing out large amounts of sulfur
and ash into the atmosphere
perhaps the meteorite just sped up the
inevitable
now let's move on to a more interesting
question could humanity survive a
meteorite impact like that
back then not a chance obviously but if
something like that were to happen in
our time
we have an advanced intellect and
technology we
filled the cosmos with probes and
satellites so we know about any possible
meteors headed straight our way
it wouldn't take us by surprise now we
might have to hide deep
underground to avoid the blast wave in
tsunamis and you'd need enough food down
there to last for at least a year
and don't forget your toilet paper but
with the right prep
humanity could stand a chance the main
problem after such an event
is to survive the global winter when the
ash covers the sky
but our species can handle it just ask
anyone living in omayakon russia
the town of 500 people holds a guinness
world record
for the coldest inhabited place on earth
they've seen the thermometer read
minus 90 degrees fahrenheit what about
preserving plant and animal life
our species has been working on that for
a long time
there's a world seed storage facility on
salvard island
it's about 40 stories underground and
can hold over 2 billion samples
the location was chosen because of the
permafrost climate
and low tectonic activity preserving
all the planet's animals would be a
tougher job perhaps
genetic engineering cloning or something
else would work
herding them all down into a bunker i
mean crocs bears and snakes included
i think i'd rather try my luck above
ground thank you